Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Andrea Zagaria. He's a PhD
student at the University of Trento in Italy. And
today, we're focusing mostly but not uh only on
one of his papers, is evolutionary Psychology, a scientific
revolution, a bibliomemetric response to bus 2020. So, basically,
we're going to discuss whether evolutionary psychology is actually
a scientific revolution and also talk about some other
subbranches in psychology and how they relate to one
another. So, Andrea, welcome to the show. It's a
big pleasure to everyone.
For me too, for me to thank you for
having invited, invited me here. Sure.
So, before we get into To evolutionary psychology specifically,
I would like to ask you about one of
the papers where you analyzed trends and the prominence
of four major schools of thought in scientific psychology,
which you call, or you identify as neuroscience, cognitivism,
behaviorism, and psychoanalysis, and also their intersections. And you
covered the period from 1979 to 2020. So could
you tell us about that study? How did you
approach it? I mean, what sort of methodology you
used and also the results you got there? Yeah,
yeah. So, so we, we were interested in tracking
the major subdisciplines in psychology from a bibliometric point
of view and there were some important papers on
this regard published, especially in the 90s. The first
paper, if I remember correctly, is um by Freeman,
the, the, the leading author is Freeman and is
published in 1993 or something like it and uh
because there was a debate um in the, in
the, in, in that year's speaking about a cognitive
revolution, you know. So there were some cognitivist, cognitivists,
scientists claiming that the cognitivism was a paradigm in
a Kunian sense and maybe we can talk about
that later, but a paradigm is uh a set.
OF ontological and methodological assumption of a science which
for, for some time, uh, usually a long time
provides um the, all the scientists in that area,
uh, with the means and the kind of questions
they uh have to, to answer to. OK, right.
So, uh, and so the, of course, as always,
it happens in psychology, people from the cognitivism were
saying, oh, we are the most important guys in
the field and you know, the cognitivism is the
long-awaited paradigm in psychology. And so some, uh, you
know, scholars, uh, like, uh, were, were interested in
trying to answer quantitatively that, that question because, of
course, if you go to answer a certain scholar
about their uh uh preferred theory, they are going
to tell that theory is the most important one
and the most beautiful one. And so they did
this very simple study which is different from ours,
but they try to track the trends during time.
And uh what they found is that cognitivism was
rising, but that the prevalence of cognitivism in scientific
psychology wasn't that high to, you know, um to,
to give it the status of a paradigm. And
so, um, after that seminal study, there was a
special issue in the American Psychology, so it was
kind of, you know, uh, I think it's a
quite cited study and there was some debate about
it and then they did other studies in the
years later, uh like refining the methodology. Um, BUT
the last, um, study to date was published in
2007, like uh 2007, 2007 by Spare, and uh
the last years were untouched. And one thing, um,
uh, the scholars after Freeman did was to add
neuroscience into the equation. So they tried to investigate
also neuroscience. And, but there were, you know, some
technicalities and some methodological problems and so we tried
to re-approach the, the issue like uh more than
10 years later, the the last study published and
to, you know, to do a more fine grade
methodology. And what we did is that we expanded
the set of keywords in order to, you know,
operationalize each of one of these sub-disciplines. And we
use a sort of protocol to do that. So
we, uh, first, we identify the C term and
then we identify the potential of associated terms with
that C terms for each, you know, school of
thought and we run analysis on psyche info, which
is the official database of the APA, the American
Psychological Association, to detect which of, which ones of
this indicator was, were in terms of frequent mostly
associated with the seed terms. Um, FOR instance, you
have, you know, um, the C term for, uh,
neuroscience, uh, um, was, uh, was, uh, newer, OK,
with the wildcard, and then we associate a list
of, um, of descriptors and we, we, at the
end, we got the, the, uh, the 10 indicator,
uh, which were most more um appropriate to investigate
neuroscience that where I'm just listing a few. Um,
uh, NEW, of course, the brain, nerve, and the
wildcard. The wildcard is an asterisk and it helps
you retrieving all the words that end with different
letters but that are associated with the, um, the
same route. For instance, when you have, um, you
know, um new asterisks, you can, you, you, you,
you can find uh neuroscience, uh, neural, and blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah. And so we, we, we,
we found for each one of this school of
thought, a set of indicators and we inputed them
in specific field codes that these specific parts of
the document in order to be, for the analysis
to be easily replicable in the future. So we
investigated, uh, for instance, the title, the abstract. The
keywords of the paper and the uh the um
the APA keyboards were different from the keyboard, the
keywords um selected by the authors and the, the
medical um subject headings, which are the keywords, um,
the official keywords by department. And what we found,
and now we get to the most interesting part
is that uh uh neuroscience, at least from the
1979 to 2020, which was the period we investigated
because of uh the um because some one indicator
of the the influence of the journal was, you
know, um, available only for that uh kind of
period. Uh, IN that period, so from the 80s
to, to nowadays, the most important part of the,
um the most important subdiscipline in psychology is by
far neuroscience, by far. And that was kind of
underestimated by previous studies. And the second one is
cognitivism, of course, and we see that psychoanalysis and
behaviorism are in decline, especially, you know, especially psychoanalysis
but also behaviorism. And that is speaking of mainstream
psychology that is all, you know, peer reviewed journal
indexed in psych info. Things get a little bit
different when you uh focus just on highly influential
journals. That is thanks to the social science journal
citation reports, which is, you know, official indexes of
the impact factor on, on the journal. We were
able to detect for each one of your uh
investigated the most inf information journals in psychology. And
we, uh, and we uh selected the, the 1st
4 of them. And we investigated the papers only
in that kind of journal. So representing, you know,
very influent papers, which are different from the mainstream,
uh, mainstream. And there, we found a similar but
kind of uh slightly different um scenarios, so in
which cognitivism is higher than neuroscience, and then we
have behaviorism and psych analysis. And then lastly but
not less importantly, we investigated non-English papers. That is
all, all papers, uh, which are published in non-English
language, but of course, in order to have them
indexed inside info, you have to, to have, uh,
your original paper in your language, non-English language, but
also the title and the abstract and the keywords
in English. So you can investigate it through English
keywords even though the paper is not in English.
And what we found in that specific source is
that uh The, the, the psychoanalysis is still on
the, on the, on, you know, uh one of
the most important, uh, you know, uh school of
thought. And this is very, very interesting because this
is like a very different scenario from the scientific
or my stream psychology. And some sanometric studies quite
robustly associate publishing in your, in your own language
rather than English, if you're not an English speaker.
From the necessity to communicate with your local community
and to have an impact on your local community
instead of, you know, having your career advanced if
you want to publish or super influential journals. And
so what we think is that psychoanalysis is still
very prevalent in clinical practice when, you know, clinicians
want to communicate the results to their uh niche,
the, the, the, the, the social uh social niche.
And, uh, but it is not important in terms
of scientific, purely scientific endeavors. So it is still
a, you know, common practice to help people in
their everyday lives, but it is not, you know,
um, successful research program in the, in the scientific
landscape. And lastly, I want to notice that even
though we, I'm talking about percentage because of course,
we, we computed relative frequencies, uh, what we found
is that the, uh, the majority of papers indexed
insideIfo are not tied to none of these theories.
OK. Yeah, and that is very interesting because it
means maybe that the large part of psychology is
not tied to any specific grand theory about the
mind, but it's more like applied. And, and that
is psychology,
yeah,
and that points back to the non-paradigmatic issue, but
maybe we have time to discuss about it.
Yeah, sure, sure. No, there are lots of interesting
things that you mentioned there. I mean one of
them. Uh, IS very, uh, I, I'm very curious
about it because, of course, I don't know to
what extent you could give us more information about
that, but when you mentioned that, for example, when
you include the papers that were written in non-English
languages, I mean, in other languages, that, that psychoanalysis
was more prevalent at least when it comes to
their, to its clinical applications. It's very interesting because
I Is that this idea that outside of the
English speaking world like the US, Canada, United Kingdom,
in continental Europe, let's say even today psychoanalysis would
have a very big presence.
Yeah, definitely, yes, definitely, yes, especially if you, I
mean, because there's a different aim, you know, in,
in, of course, I, so I'm not a psychoanalysis,
so I do respect psychoanalysis from a historical point
of view and I do think there are some.
Interesting things still nowadays, if you think about intersubjective
psychoanalysis, if you think about scholars such as Fonagy
in the UK and blah, blah, blah. But even
though I respect some part of it, I, I,
I, I don't share at all, you know, the
theoretical assumptions about the mind from the psychoanalytic point
of view because I don't think they're scientific. And
so, you clearly see that at, at least, I
don't know if you're familiar with um Lakatos and
his theory of um scientific progress, but it would,
it would have said that. Seis is no longer
a generative progressive research program. So it doesn't have
any more some predictions, some new prediction to be
tested. And uh that leads, you know, is programmed
to advance and to be more competitive than other
research programs. Because if you think, I don't know,
if, if you have some insights about human behavior,
uh, and you can test them experimentally, I think
that other subdisciplines would, would, uh, you know, outperform
psychlysis for sure. But still, in the clinical practice
and as you mentioned in the Continental Europe, uh,
also academic clinical psychology scenario, also here in Italy,
Psychology is still a big thing. When you go
to the university, a lot of psychoanalysis is there
and you are trained, you know, many friends of
mine still did a classical psychoanalytic training, which is
kind of problematic in my opinion, but still, it
is uh it is something that is there and
is real and alive, so we have to acknowledge
it. Yeah.
Uh, NO, even here in Portugal, for example, I'm,
I'm not sure if, uh, they still do that,
but at least up till 98 years ago, they
were still teaching, uh, Freudian theory even in anthropology
courses. So, yeah.
And especially people from the humanities. And uh I
think there is uh uh the same study by
uh Robin or Freeman also in the 90s. Demonstrative
that psychoanalysis is still super popular among the humanists,
you know, so people from the, and also in,
in my personal life, when you talk with psychology,
with someone who is coming from the humanities, such
as philosophy, architecture, or even economics, but the Especially,
you know, that kind of, uh, you know, letters,
that, that kind of, uh, uh, studies, and they
are all fascinated with, with psychoanalysis and that's kind
of, you know, annoying for me that they ah
do you know Freud, do you know Jung, especially
Laan. They love Laan. I hate Laan, you know.
I don't have anything personally with any Laanan, but
I, I, I, I really don't, can't stand Laan
as a, as a theorist. And so, yeah, but,
but it's still very, very, very popular and very,
because, because that is very catchy, you know, because
I think that Freud did a wonderful job in
selling his ideas out, uh, his ideas to the,
to the, to the public because, you know, many
ideas, I, I did a wonderful history of psychology
course, uh, when I was graduate and my professor
was kind of critic towards psychoanalysis and he showed
us how Freud took many ideas from the mainstream
of the clinical psychology of the 19th century and
made them uh very palatable to the public. But,
you know, everyone, uh, already knew what the unconscious
was. Everyone already knew the importance of sexuality, and
everyone already knew the importance of, um, you know,
uh, being in a In a kind of altered
state of consciousness during psychotherapy that is hypnosis to
get, uh, you know, your, your, your problems solved,
uh, and everyone knew, you know, and, uh, especially,
for example, Pierre Janet, which is, uh, you know,
more on trend today. Uh, ALREADY knew the power
of distressing events that is traumatic events in determining
your later adult life. So, you know, Freud did
something, of course, he was a genius, of course,
but it was uh especially capable in selling his
ideas, I think. Yeah.
Yeah, I, I don't know what it is specifically
about psychoanalysis, but apparently it provides people with very
compelling psychological narratives. So, I mean, I
mean,
you even see it in Hitchcock movie. So, and
the narratives are actually very compelling, at least in
the movies. So when it comes to psychoanalysis more
directly, I'm not so sure. But anyway, apparently. We
people love it.
So, yeah, yeah, because, because they're very romantic, you
know, and so it was very intelligent, you know,
adopting these Greek names, so, you know, your Oedipus
complex, your Elektra complex, and you have this very,
you know, catchy things, you know, you, you, you
feel like you're like almost a, a romantic hero,
you know, in discovering your, your drives. And so
it was, of course, I think that psychotherapy has
to be somehow romantic, but uh I, not, not
not necessary to that level, yes. Yeah.
So, uh, another thing just before we get into
the paradigmatic bit, uh, uh, 11 comment that I
was going to make is that it's interesting how
sometimes we carve up the different disciplines and how
we create different branches because I would imagine that
many people who identify as neuroscientists wouldn't identify themselves
as psychologists. Or of being part of a branch
of psychology. I mean, many times we look at
neuroscience as something separate from psychology,
right? Yeah, yeah, definitely, uh, well, it depends on
your assumptions about the nature of the mind. I,
I'm very passionate about the philosophy of mind, uh,
generally speaking, and, but, and I, I do, I,
I, I have a materialist, so I don't think
we have. You know, uh, you know, we, I,
I, I, I, I also think we, we have
a spirit, uh, but I'm, I'm a sort of,
of pine psychist, but still, I, I do spend
some time in thinking about the very nature of
the mind and, uh, as you mentioned, um, many
neuroscience. Don't identify themselves as a psychologist because they
are kind of skeptical about psychology and they want
to do, you know, hard science. We, we are
doing the real stuff here, guys, no. So, and
they don't want to be, you know, uh, merged
with someone that they see as something less scientific
or or like softer. Um, PROBLEM is, uh, that,
yes, and yes, I, I think that, uh, some
neuroscientists do not identify themselves as a psychologists even
though the majority of them, uh, don't, never spend
properly uh their time in. Setting at least to
themselves privately the question of what mind is because
if you, if you, if you, if you try
to answer that question, it's a very difficult question,
but it's very difficult that you see the brain
as, as, as something completely detached from our mental
life. So you are a psychologist in a sense.
And, but I, uh, I would also say, uh,
this to be noted that, uh, I, I have
a, a conversation with Andre Bittermann who, who is,
uh, you know, a brilliant, um, uh, yeah, a
brilliant, uh, scholar in meta-science, some science about science,
this kind of study, and he said to me
that uh like Info as, um, you know, in
the last years, it, it has incorporated more and
more uh journals, purely neuroscientific journals. And so maybe
our results are slightly biased in a, um, you
know, overestimation of neuroscience, but still I would say
that it is undoubtedly the, the most prominent approach
in uh in psychology as for now, yeah, yeah,
I,
I mean it was just a comment. It was
just that I think that many neuroscientists out there
would position themselves closer to something like biology than
psychology, I guess. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So, uh,
and at a certain point in the same, I
think it's in the same study, you say that
the study supports the inference that scientific psychology is
a non-paradigmatic or pre-paradigmatic discipline. So could you explain
that and also what a paradigm is exactly? Yeah,
yeah, definitely. So I, I would explain it through
an example. So if you go to a physicist.
Even an undergraduate in physicists, in in physics and
ask them, well, what is the force or what
is energy? It is very likely they will all
answer the same. So I have the definition here.
So a force is an influence that can cause
an object to change its velocity unless counterbalanced by
other forces, and there is a specific measure, you
know, to, um, to, uh, to, to measure the,
the force which is the Newton and no one
is going to debate about it. And the Newton
is a specific formula. Which is kilogramx meter per
squared second, and no one is going to discuss
about it. And if you ask them what is
in an energy, they will likely answer energy is
the capacity to, to do work and it has
a specific formula and no one is going to
debate about it. And if you go to a
biologist and you ask them what is a gene.
No one is going like very, very few people,
maybe less than 1%. WILL be doubtful about the
genus. So a gene is a sequence of nucleotide
bases which are blah, blah blah blah blah. And
if you ask them what an inflammation is, everyone
is going to agree. Well, if you go to
a psychologist and uh ask them what emotion is
or intelligence is and not to speak about the
basic term of cognition, for instance, or mind or
consciousness. And, uh, and if you go, for instance,
I have a background in clinical psychology and I
study clinical psychology. So if you go and ask
what is attachment, if you go to a, the,
the developmental psychologist and ask what, what is attachment,
they will answer one thing. If you go to
a personality psychology and you ask them what is
attachment, they will ask another thing. Similar but different.
And you ask, you know, clinical psychology, what is
trauma? Uh, EVEN in the most recent APA and
Book of trauma, there is no universal definition of
trauma, you know, there are, there is no events
in the world which is traumatic by definition. It's
not speaking of mental disorder, depression, and, and whatever.
And so, uh, this is very interesting because uh
like trying to also uh addressing your question about
the nature of the paradigm and the Thomas Kohn
because, you know, the, the philosophy of science which
is tied to the concept of paradigm was developed
by Thomas Kuhn in the 60s. And what is
very, what like struck me when I uh read
again the structure of the scientific revolutions, which is
the, the book that he published in 1962 about
this kind of theory. Uh, HE stated, like, I'm,
I'm, I'm citing him literally because in the preface
of the, of the, of the, of the book,
he said at page 9 and 10, some, uh,
so it was invited, so this is the, the,
you know, the thing to know before a hearing
to this, to the quote. It was invited at
the Center for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral Science
at Stanford University. So he spent some time there
as a, as a, you know, um, visiting scholar.
And he said some, when he was there for
a, you know, for a for a uh a
period, then he said, somehow the practice of astronomy,
physics, chemistry or biology normally fails to evoke the
controversies over fundamentals that today seem endemic among, say,
psychologists or sociologists, OK? Attempting to discover the source
of that difference that is very important, led me
to recognize the role in scientific research of what
I since called paradigm. And so this is, this
is mind-blowing because Thomas Kuhn was prompt to uh
create his, you know, super inf influential uh theory
when he discovered like personally, the chaos you, you,
you, you, you, you, you have as a, you
know, as a, as a training psychologist or even
as a, uh, you know, licensed psychology or a
scholar in psychology which is chaos, pure chaos. And
uh I also published a paper about it. We
compared In 12 introductory books to psychology and the
APA Dictionary of Psychology, um, uh, you know, uh,
some definition of core constructs of, uh, of psychology,
you know, like mind, consciousness, intelligence, and all the
definitions differ for, for, for, for, for, for the
major part. And so, There is a paradigm. A
paradigm is in, there is also, you know, uh,
a codebcoon in this regard, but I would say
that I would define it as a hardcore set
of methodological and ontological assumptions uh about the subject
of studies, and that is we know we have
to study this thing and we know how to
study this thing and no one is going to
debate over how to study it and what to
study. And uh Kuhn called it the, the, mm
m puzzle sol solving activity that is, we have,
we know how to do that and then we
have a different, you know, um puzzles to solve,
but we know how to solve it, you know.
And the interesting thing is that the para the
para paradigmatic status of psychology is, has always been
acknowledged by leading scholars in the field. So if
you, if, if, if you go to James back
in the um William James at the end of
the 20th century.
The 19th century, I
think, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, at the end
of, of the, of the 19th century, he, uh,
at the end of his book The Psychology Brier
course, he said that psychology, uh, it at the
stage of physics before Newton or chemistry before Lavo
wasisi. OK. But this kind of, uh, this kind
of quote was, this kind of claim was. YOU
know, uh, endorsed repeatedly over the course of scientific
psychology by very diverse scholar, and they're very famous
such as Vigosky. I don't know if you know
him, but the, you know, very influential developmental psychologist.
He spoke about the crisis of psychologist in the
20s and then uh uh Edelbrecher in the 30s,
and the rombach himself in the 50s, he, he
compared the uh the scientific psychology to a circus.
It did it like literally. And then Kohl, as
I, as I said before, then Sigmund Koch was
a very important scholar in the 80s. And then
we have no less known uh psychologists who nevertheless,
they dedicated all their lives in studying this thing,
which is, which it is, uh, which was called
by Sigmund Koch and then later by Gregory Rs
as the problem of psychology. So we don't have,
uh, we don't have a shared theory. And, and
we are certainly at another stage of scientific development,
um, in, in respect to chemistry or physics or
biology
and, and so this is still true in 2024,
I would say and, and that yes. I would
say yes, yes, yeah, so,
so let, let me ask you, uh, I, I
don't know if you can answer this question exactly,
but Well, I mean, what would you say are
perhaps some of the reasons why over the course
of more than 100 years, apparently the same problem
is still here in psychology.
It's a big question. I think this, this is
the question, $1 billion dollar question. I think, uh,
I think there are, there are two different, uh,
main reasons. The first one is the hardest one
and I don't know if we will ever be
able to solve it. Um, THAT is, I would
say 3 reasons. Uh, LIKE the first one is
the, you know, very famous hard problem of consciousness
that it is very difficult to integrate what we
are from the objective point of view and from
the subjective point of view. Mhm. And then the
second one is the, that is true, is the
complexity of the human mind and behavior. We are
inherently complex and it is inherently difficult to, uh,
maybe we will have better to, I think that
we have a wonderful, uh pro promising line of
research speaking of behavioral genetics in the, in the
years to come. But still, I don't know if
we will have a major shared theory. And the
third problem, which is also linked to the fact
that um evolutionary psychology is no, is, is, um,
could be more prominent in the evolution in the,
in, in, in the broader study of psychology, but
it is not. Is that And you interviewed Dan
Serber, so you know it very well that we,
as human, one compelling uh evolutionary theory is that,
that our reason, our capacity to reason is not
driven by the uh necessity to seek an objective
truth, but rather to persuade the other, the other's
humans socially. And so we seem to be hardwired
from the biological point of view to conflate the
descriptive is. So this is a mechanism and this
is the way it works with. The rather morally
out. So this is should be how things should,
should be. And so this is very problematic, for
instance, for evolutionary psychology when they talk about gender
difference or violence or homicide or I don't know,
uh, stereotypes and, and, and the problem, the main
problem which I see in many scientists as well,
which should be at least less biased in this
regard is that you, you can't conflate the descriptive
is with the moral. Oh, they are completely different
level. If I say this is um how the
mind uh uh this is how um the mind
of a, of a rapist works and I'm trying
to, to understand the rapist, the, the rapists. I,
I'm not trying to justify his behaviors or his
or her behaviors because that, that, that, that, that
would be nonsense. And so I think that it
is very difficult to have an objective psychology because
you Uh, there, there is, you know, uh, the,
the, the, this, this, um, this problem that um
You are studying something, someone or something uh the
consciousness of understanding the theory you are proposing. And
use them as they wish to justify themselves. And
so this is problematic. And so this is very
problematic. I, I, I, I mean, if we study
the birds and their social behaviors, no birds is
going to see, ah, you told me in a
paper that I'm more prone naturally to rape uh
the other birds, female birds, so I can do
that. But if you speak about humans. That is
difficult. So it is a major, a major obstacle,
I think. Yeah.
And do you think that perhaps another problem here,
and this is something you also mentioned in your
paper, but I'm not sure if you would call
it a problem, it has to do with the
insularity of the different sub-disciplines in psychology.
Yes, definitely. Uh, CAUSE, so, um, I don't know
if you, you know, uh, I, as, as an
academic, uh, I, uh, I spent a lot of
time, uh, and I'm still understanding if I want
to be an academic for all my life, but
I spent a lot of my time, you know,
reading the description of the journals when you want
to submit a paper. And all of them, they
claim to be interdisciplinary. It, it is very cool
to claim I am interdisciplinary. Oh, this is an
interdisciplinary journal. And actually, when you go to the
Evidence, uh, it is very, for instance, there is
a study published in the 2014 by Klia, I
think, yeah, and, uh, theylia Russo, and they, uh,
show that in clinical psychology they uh investigated the
a humanistic school of thought, psychoanalysis, and, um, I
think cognitivism and a cognitive behavioral approach and they
found that each one of school of thought is
likely to mention all, only the papers to each
and one school of thought. So there is this
very, you know, uh compar compartmentalization. And also in
our study, we, uh, you know, the large majority
of intersections between this first call of thought with
the exception of a Uh, cognitivism and neuroscience, which
are largely contaminated and to a lesser extent between
behaviorism and neuroscience, which there is also a contamination
there, um, are kind of negligible, at least if
compared to the broader scenario of the, of the
prominence to the, to the other theories. And um
of course, it is just, you know, a thought
we have to uh ponder more more about it
and do other studies, but this easily matches uh
also my personal experience as an academic, you know,
we, um, and this is linked to a broader
problem of uh of, of the Current academic landscapes.
So people are interested in publishing, publishing, publishing, and
they have very few time to reading, to read
properly, to read not only in their field of
research, but generally speaking. And I, uh, and I
have personally met some people who were very recognized
in that specific field and they did know anything,
anything, not on psychology broadly speaking, but in the
super closer field of research because they didn't uh
didn't care, they, they did not have the time
and blah, blah, blah. And so I do think
there is a major problem. We, we don't have,
you know, uh, you know, the Renaissance uh model
of intellectual who spent Uh, a lot of time
trying to be interdisciplinar, of course, it is impossible
nowadays to be like purely interdisciplinear because the amount
of knowledge is, you know, uh, unmanageable. It's not
feasible. It's not feasible, but not, I mean, not
that hyperspecialization would be beneficial. And so, yes, so
I think, I think that, uh, the lack of
cross, cross fertilization is, is indeed the problem nowadays,
yes.
OK, so let's now talk about uh the work
you've done on evolutionary psychology specifically because, uh, David
bus a few years ago, I think in 2020
or something like that called it a scientific revolution.
So we've already talked about paradigms here. So first
of all, what is a scientific revolution and then
we can talk about his claims specifically. Yeah,
yeah, definitely. So I would say that the best
thing to Uh, understand what the scientific revolution is,
is to briefly, um, you know, uh, understand how,
uh, you know, the progress of science of occurs
according to KO. And the first, uh, stage is
the prepardigmatic stage, and we are, we are, we
have talked about it. So we have plenty of
schools who disagree over fundamentals. For instance, Newton, and
Newton, for instance, Kohn, um made the example of
uh uh optics. Before, um, the, the, the book
Optics by Newton and it said that there were
different uh ontologies and methodology. There was the Aristotelian
School of Though, the Epicurean School of Thought, the
Platonic School of Thought, and they hold a different
ontologists and methodologies. But then, uh, and this is
the prepardigmatic stage. And then, but then the book
by Newton came out and it was a watershed.
And, um, and slowly, um, uh, people in optics
began to understand that uh the best way of
explaining uh things was not Aristotelian and epium protonima
was the new part new, new research program initiated
by, um, by Newton. And this gradually took over
the other, uh, the other school of thought. And,
and so when a school, uh, when, when, uh,
you know, a rising school of thought, after years
and after, you know, um, of course, it, it,
it is not that linear, but after, you know,
going against, um, different kind of scientific sociological or
psychological oppositions becomes the norm. And you have 3
indexes in order to understand that. Uh, um, uh,
uh, A school of thought has become a paradigm.
So you have a first stage prepardigmatics. Second stage,
scientific revolution. And when you attain the first stage,
which is called the state of normal science, you
can understand that now we are in a normal
science period by 3 indexes according to Ku. First,
Uh, what you have in intro, you know, the
theory is the customary practice a newborn in the
that discipline is exposed to. And you can look
at it easily in, in introductory books, uh, uh,
to, um, um, given to uh undergraduate. So, imagine
physics, physics. If you go to different physics university
and you consult different introductory books. They will say
almost the same, maybe with slightly different, but no
one is, is going to disagree over Newton, over,
over, you know, the Newton, the um the measure
unit or, or, or, or job or anything. And
if you go to bio biologist, uh, biology uh
department, you know, uh, each one of these introductory
books will talk about Darwin and Mendel and the,
and Fisher and the modern synthesis. Again, if you
go into psychology, that is kind of different. But
you have this kind of first index. Then secondly,
uh, the scholar in that discipline do not have
to justify themselves when they uh explain their theory.
So I, I, I take for, for granted that
everyone agrees about uh what a gene is or
what a Newton is. And then the third index
is the progressive marginalization of other scholars. For instance,
I don't think that no one, there is no
one in physics nowadays that is called themselves Aristotelic
or Platonic or epicurean and, or, you know, and,
and, mm like very few, few, few people in
biology call them creationists. I, I think almost no
one after Darwin. And so this is the kind
of normal science. But then, uh, and so the
paradigm, because, uh, the, um, the paradigm is occurring
in that stage. So the scientific revolution is the
2nd, 2nd stage. And then what may happen is
that it, uh, that the scientific uh Uh endeavors
might be facing some, some anomalies, so some, uh,
things that you cannot explain thanks to your usual
normal science uh perspective and then you encounter a
phase of crisis, which is the first stage. And
then maybe another theory similar to the optics takes
over because it is better than the other ones
and you have a scientific revolution again. And then
normal science and then again, and then this kind
of uh endless cycle. But of course, this kind
of um uh watershed event occurs in a relatively
long period of time. You don't have a paradigm
shift in one, you know, one, you know, every
10 years, but we are speaking about centuries or
we are speaking about, about long times nevertheless. So
a scientific revolution according to Kunn. And that is
why I, I took the instance by David by
some critically, is that something that you can easily
understand, you know, if a scientific revolution has occurred
or, or even if it is happening, happening as
we speak, you can see it in different indexes,
but the one I chose to investigate was The,
the, the prominence because as I, I, uh, as
I said before, 11 index of the scientific revolution
is that you are gradually taking over the other
competitors. And so, uh, that is why I decided
what to do and uh to, to investigate from
the bibliometric point of view, devolutionary psychology research program
against its main competitor, which is the standard social
science model, yeah.
Yeah, and we're going to talk about the results
you got there, but just before that, just to
be clear, in his 2020 paper, does David Bs
use the term scientific revolution in the Kian way
as well?
Yes, so, yeah, so he, he never cited the
structure of scientific revolution, but it was, um, very,
you know, very, um. Closely to do that because
he used the Kunian lexicon. So speaking of scientific
revolution, paradigm shift, and it, it, it, it did
some, you know, quite Kunian uh examples such as,
you know, he, he said that evolutionary psychology was
the same as Copernicus Elegenri's theory, which was actually
a paradigm shift in aunian sense because no one
today, uh, unless you know, uh, some very crazy
people believes that the, the earth is at the
center of the universe. So, and, and also it
analyzed the history of psychology applying this Kuian perspective,
you know, we say, oh we had back in
the days we had the structuralism and then uh
behaviorism takes over and then cognitivism and then ah
now we have evolutionary psychology.
Yeah. Right. So, tell us then about the bibliometric
analysis you did there when it comes to the
prevalence of evolutionary psychology within psychology more broadly. And
also, you compared it, I think, to what the
Cosmides and John to be in the early 90s
called the standard social model uh approach in psychology,
which, which is sort of the more sociocultural approach.
THE more environmentalist approach. So, uh, how do you,
do you do that and what results did you
get
there? OK, so basically the, the methodology was kind
of similar to the one I described before. So
first of all, uh, we investigated the APA Zaurus,
which is, you know, the official controlled vocabulary of
the APA and basically it is a controlled vocabulary
because it controls for redundancy. For instance, uh, the
word work-related injuries is used to design work-related injuries,
workplace injuries, occupational injuries, and occupational-related injuries. So, when
you type in psyching for occupational-related injuries, the official,
uh, name, it is associated with is work, work-related
injuries. So we, in order to use some keywords,
we started looking at the APA to Zavros. And
then we chose, as, as, as we did in
the other study, someit terms, that is evolutionary psychology
and sociocultural factors, respectively for the evolutionary psychology and
standard social science model. Hence for EP and SSM
to be the faster. And, and then we investigated
because the APASauros is a hierarchical structure. So um
it has like more important names and then it,
it has uh narrower terms and related terms who
are on the same level. And we investigated, uh,
you know, quantatively, I think 60 or 70, um,
you know, um. Names and then we decided qualitatively
what uh to use for our uh from with
I, I, I was alone in this paper. I
decided what, what to do in the, with the,
or which specific um descriptor to use. You know,
you, you, you could also use a quantitative uh
uh way of deciding what indicators to use, but
it wasn't, you know, preferable in this study. And
Uh, for instance, for EP we have animal behavior,
animal cognition, animal communication, behavioral genetics, and blah blah
blah. Uh,
ALSO you would classify behavioral genetics as being part
of EP in this case.
Yeah, definitely, yes, because, uh, this is a beautiful
question because I decided to investigate EP broadly speaking.
So not the Santa Barbara AP, so you know,
with the massive modularity and the EEA assumption and
all the, the, that kind of stuff, but More
broadly, because, you know, you have the standard social
science model, which is a heuristics used by Tubian
Cosmide. There is no, you know, department uh in
somewhere in the world called the SSM and there
is no one who called themselves SSM because it's
kind of derogatory. And, and so, and so I,
I, I, I would identify quite uh broadly the
SSM and so I wanted to assure EP to
be as broad as the SSM. And so what
I try to do is not Not to compare
the Santa Barbara AP against the SSM, but broadly
all approaches or all papers actually who mentioned um
e evolutionary laden concept. And, uh, you know, standard
culturalist concept to to operationalize uh the vision that
nature is important or culture is important, right? And
which is kind of dichotomic, but we, we will
see not that much. And, and so, uh, yeah,
I do think that behavioral genetics is somehow, you
know, uh evolutionary laden because the basic assumption of
behavioral genetics is that genes are very important to
in determining your behavior. And unless you think that
genes are untied to the evolutionary process, which is
impossible, still you are somehow tied to, to evolution.
Yeah, no, no, but it's very important that you
mentioned that and I asked you more about that
because many people would probably not classify behavior genetics
under evolutionary psychology. They would think about them as
two different disciplines. And also, I mean, there are
there are people who are trying theoretically to integrate
evolutionary psychology. Behavioral genetics, but actually if you talk
with a behavior gene geneticist and an evolutionary psychologist,
uh, their methodologies and what they're trying to study,
uh, many times are very different things,
definitely, yes, definitely, yes. So yeah, I, I, I,
you know, I made that very clear in the
paper that I was investigating a broad sense evolutionary
psychology and not the. The famous one by the
EP, the Santa Barbara one, and um, so for
instance, I also include the human behavioral ecology which
is, you know,
so that that that's interesting because many people would
say that that is part of anthropology.
Yeah, but still they are, uh, yes, but still
they are um studying human behavior, uh, uh, with,
uh, evolutionary assumptions, even though they are kind of
different from the ones, uh, from the DP, but
still there is this, there is this underlying assumption
which is, uh, evolution is important, is important in
order to understand human behavior, and we can debate
over the methodology or whatever, but there is a
very huge assumption. And I, I, I still don't
think how uh scientists could ignore evolution because of
course, no one in the SSM program would deny
that we are product of the, of evolution, but
somehow, I don't know how, how they um say
that it's not that important. It, it is almost
negligible. And, uh, and so, um, yeah, so this
is the, you know, the, the fighting between the
um and if you think about it, it is
a, a long standing fight in between the in
philosophy was the fight between Inati and em. So,
I asked you about you. Behavioral ecology because I
know that there are many human behavioral ecologists that
are not very fond of the evolutionary psychologists and
they they present themselves as studying ecology and ecological
factors tend to be environmental factors and not,
yeah, definitely, definitely, yeah, I would say the Santa
Barbara IP is somehow, you know, a lot of
people are dissatisfied with it and Uh, I, I
think there are some reasons for that, but yes,
I, I want to, to, uh, this is very
important. I, I, I, I didn't want to compare
Santa Barbara AP, but the broader assumption of evolution
as something important and not negligible. So this is
the main thing. Still, as we will see, the
results are rather, uh, they speak from themselves. And
then on the other end, um, they are the
um the list comprehending the many indicators for the
SSM comprehended terms like acculturation, sexism, patriarchy. Um, MICROAGGRESSION,
minority group, racism, gender identity, feminism, and blah, blah,
blah. So this kind of, we, we are all,
if, if, uh, uh, you know, you, you open
a tweet in the last 10 years, you are
encountering for sure this kind of words. So if
you are a little bit into the debate, especially
in the US this kind are, are very trendy
nowadays.
But, but let me just ask you, since it
included terms like feminism, uh, would, would it also
include studies from the humanities, like, for example, women's
studies, gender studies, and stuff like that, or I'm,
I'm including everything is indexed info. So everything is,
um, is believed by the, you know, official team
of psych Info as being, uh, as, uh, it
has to be. Included in the psych for database
and actually this is, this is one of because
my my paper was commented somehow critically by William
Costello and Douglas. William Costello is a PhD student
of of yeah, I, I,
I interviewed him on the show, so,
ah,
really back in 2022, yeah,
OK, uh, uh, I didn't know that and, and
they did, they did an analysis and they had
this, um. This kind of, uh, one of their
uh criticism toward my paper was that psych Info
included not scientific paper, not scientific journals, and they
said because, you know, Annas of dyslexia is not
a scientific journals. And I say that I, I,
I answered them like privately. I also want to,
you know, publish another paper regarding this, but I,
I said that, well, it's David, is, I, it's
very different, uh, it's very difficult to, uh, you
know, um, draw a line specifically where science begins
and where, where science ends. And so it is
very, even though you, you were right. I, I,
I would not know how to operationalize that kind
of uh um of instance in a bibliometric study.
First thing. Second thing, it is very difficult to
discard a journal as a non-scientific in an IS
uh Dixit fashion. So I can say it is
not scientific, but I have to demonstrate it because
otherwise, my own behavior is very non-scientific. And so,
I would say that, of course, my, my research
has some, some limitations and of course, what we
can do, what I can do in the future
to make it more robust is, for instance, to
investigate only the highly inflation journals, as I said
before. So, if I tie my uh research to
largely a the, uh, you know, important and information
journals in psychology, that would be kind of, uh,
uh, you know, uh, another step in, in that
direction. Even though personally, I don't think is that,
the results would change much because looking at, you
know, flagship journals of, um, such as the American
psychologists and the kind of papers they publish nowadays.
Uh, THAT are very toward the SSM, uh, scenario
because there was this very, you know, um, influence
of the SSM in the academic, uh, US US
uh landscape. And, but we can do that, of
course, we, we, we can see if that change,
um. But what we, uh, what I obtained and
to a lesser extent, what also what, uh what
uh Costello and Douglas obtained even though somehow differently,
and I do think there are some serious problems
with the methodology, but we can talk about that
later, is that, well, in mainstream psychology that is
in the um all um peer-reviewed journals uh indexes
I came from, you know, the, by official team
by the APA. Um, AND, uh, the, um, uh,
evolutionary psychology, broadly speaking, starts in the 1950s because
this search was, uh, covering a broader, uh, time
span than the other one. So we, I investigated
from the 1950 to the, to 2020, 2022 actually.
Um. We see, we, we see it like uh
starting at about 3% of the overall publications and
then we gradually reach 44 4% in the last
years. On the other end, we say, we, we
see that the SSM start at about 5% in
the 50s and we reach actually uh 10%, 10,
11% in the last years. And we say that
the, the uh the gap is, you know, the,
the growth of the SSM is particularly evident from
the um end of the 80s on. So from
the 90s.
Oh, that's interesting. So that ends up coinciding also
with, with the, the advent of what we call
evolutionary psychology in the late 80s or
yeah, exactly, yes, it's kind of uh it's kind
of paradoxical, but yes, and so we can say
that on average the SSM um SSM laden contributions
are twice. ARE twice, um, actually, uh, 2.20, um,
times the evolutionary uh psychological contributions. And in the
last years, that is 2020, 2022, this gap is,
this ratio is even larger, is about um 2.5.
OK. And even in the William Costello and Douglas
reanalysis, which has some problem because they added two
words to the uh EP keywords, a set of
keywords, so it was unbalanced. So EP add add
more keywords than uh SSM.
So what were, what were those two keywords, by
the way? The,
the two keywords were inclusive fitness. And the other
one, I think, uh, papa parental investment and psychological
adaptation, and they removed the animal cognition. So they
removed animal cognition and they added inclusive fitness, parent
talent investment and psychological adaptation. And, but they did
not, and they also restricted the term uh culture
in the SSM keywords in order to avoid the
uh the term culture as used in the biology
paper that is the, you know, the soil full
of microorganisms. And so, of course, they restricted the
SSM and they expanded the FP so of course
the Russia was different, but it was like a
kind of a methodological concern I already expressed to
them privately.
And, by the way, but even with their approach,
what results did they get?
EVEN though we, even, even with this approach, which
of course will power EP, uh, like the contributions
by definition, um, their, their, the average ratio is
1.78, so closer to 2. In the last years,
it's almost equal to mine, so 2.5. So last
year's 2.5. So it is quite a big hiatus
and of course, what is the take home message?
Uh, FROM these studies, even though you, you, you
think that their study, uh, can say something valuable.
I, I don't think so. But even though we
take this for granted, still, we can't call scientific
re uh evolutionary psychology as a scientific revolution. We
can't because uh it's clearly outperformed by the SSM.
Clearly, no one can deny that. So, uh, we
have two options, uh, or we, uh, you know,
um, we, we can say I, I, I wasn't
referring to scientific revolution in a Kian sense, but
that is kind of difficult because the terms were
kind of Uh, Cunha Leyden, or we can say,
well, this is the, you know, state status of
affairs and we, we, we have to do something
about it because I uh I also had some
discussions with some evolutionary scholars and I tried to
publish this, some, uh, um, I, I had some
problems in publishing these papers, the, this paper. And
uh I, I had, you know, um private back
channel with a, and I would say an, an
important evolutionary scholar. Who was, I would say ideologically
annoyed by my results and I was kind of
sad of that because I was white. Uh, YOU
should be, you know, the no scientist, uh, that
went to the bank, the ideologically laden SSM people,
but you are, you are still ideologically laden and
uh also, you know, the paper by By by
Costello and his collaborator, I see it something ideologically
laden because I, I, I, I do think that,
of course, if you add two words, the, the
results will be unbalanced and you, but the problem
is that I do share and maybe we can,
we, we, we, we can get to that later.
I do share, I do. I do have sympathy
for the evolutionary psychology and also for the EPP
Santa Barbara EP program. I, I don't, don't have
any, anything uh against it. I don't, I, I
don't share many of the um Of the, of
the criticisms they had toward the Santa Barbara IP.
For instance, I had a, a conversation with a
big, big, big person in cultural evolution, like a
huge one, like one of the leading scholar in
the world in this regard. And it was very,
very, very, you know, aggressive towards Santa Barbara. And
I, I, I, I don't understand that. I have
my ideas, uh, and, but, uh, yes, but of
course, I, we, we can't call it even broadly
speaking. As a scientific scientific revolution,
yeah, and I mean, I, I mean, as far
as I'm concerned, I'm not that surprised. I would
probably be a little bit more surprised like 5
or 6 years ago because I was very much
into evolutionary psychology and I thought that perhaps it
would help, it would hold, I mean, it would
be more prominent within psychology at. We, uh, and,
and even more so now, nowadays, but, uh, as
I talked with people that would fall under neuroscience
and of course, I, I don't talk much with
psychoanalysts or behaviorists, but they, they, I know that
they are not fond of evolutionary psychology, but even
people from other sub I'm not sure if we
should call them subdisciplines, but some barriers in psychology.
Like, for example, the social psychologists, the cultural psychologists,
and, uh, uh, and even many cognitive psychologists, uh,
I mean, there are many, many people out there
that are not fond of evolutionary psychology at all.
And even the other approaches that we mentioned, behavior.
Genetics, human ecology, many, many people they also do
not like the evolutionary psychologists,
not at all. I don't know why. I, I,
I have my theory about that, but, um, of
course I, I, I don't know why. I think
that one major impediment here is, uh, uh, uh,
as I said before, this is versus old problem,
you know, the, the problem that you. Somehow, because
I think that all, they, they, they get very
mad when, when evolutionary psychology, for instance, let's talk
about attachment. No one is discussing attachment. Why? Because
it's standard, because we have little kids crying for
their mom, and this is, you know, so, you
know, hard moving. But attachment is the one evolutionary
psychobiological motivation per definition. And no one ever discussed
it. No one ever discussed bold B remarks about
the EEA. Actually, Borbi was the inventor of the.
FUCKING word. So it is kind of the, you
know, problematic that attachment, of course, there are some
critics, of course, there are some critics of attachment,
especially during, you know, they, they see attachment as
something deterministic and uh by uh reductionistic. But still,
you don't see anyone, especially in clinics or in
my own niche that is against the concept of
attachment as a evolution, evolutionary laden motivation. When you
talk about mating. And the gender differences in mating,
which are, you know, robustly, uh, documented by the
EP in my opinion, robustly, uh, things start to
change because people get, you know, get, uh, defensive
and get, um, also, you know, world leading scholar,
uh, for instance, um, I, I, I, I think
that We could uh lead back this controversy to
two very important people in the field in the
70s who were on one hand, Edward um Osborne
Wilson, so the author of sociobiology, on the other,
on, on the other hand, Stephen Jay Gould. And
uh these two people and good good was, you
know, a very important, uh super important why I
think the most cited paleontologist so far is like
he, he is super important. He also elaborated this
evolutionary theory of punct punctuated equilibrium, so it was
a leading. Expert in evolution, he wrote, you know,
you, is Magnusopus about evolution. Still, when it comes
to evolutionary psychology, um, you know, mating or, uh,
or, you know, gender differences or some uh difference
in intelligence, he wrote, uh, you know, uh, a
lot about difference in intelligence would and It was,
I, I think some, somehow ideological and that is
a pity because it was a great scientist, you
know. And uh I, I really don't know why
there is so much hate toward Santa Barbara, uh,
even though I, I, I don't share some of
their works, but still I, I know,
I, I have
a
feeling
about that.
Uh, I'm not completely sure, but at least, uh,
something that I've noticed even when it comes to
myself, when I look, when over the years I
talked with, for example, anthropologists and cultural evolutionists is
that if you look at, uh, if you look
at across cultures, if you look at ethnographies, for
example, if you do ethnographic work across different kinds
of cultures, and if you're working with a more
culturally oriented approach, let's say, um, I think it's,
it's very hard for people like that to accept
the idea that most of what happens within a
psychologically is innate, you know,
is what?
In
innate. Uh, YEAH. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah,
yeah, because, because, uh, uh, I mean, actually, that,
that's probably one of the criticisms that I would
have nowadays when it comes to evolutionary psychology. First
of all, many evolutionary psychologists are not aware. Of
they are not familiar with, uh, anthropology or anthropological
literature. And so, I mean, if you ask them
about something related to anthropology, many of them don't
know much, to be honest. Uh, AND, uh, and
I mean, and the other thing is that Uh,
I, I think that perhaps some people, not all,
because it depends. There are also a few evolutionary
psychologists who web training in anthropology and so those
approach things a little bit differently. Uh, BUT men,
uh, but some of them at least, uh, have,
uh, come to the table or, or when they
look at things at any kind of psychological phenomenon,
they assume or they start from a standpoint where
they assume that, uh, wherever. Kind of psychological phenomenon
they are analyzing that they uh that it should
be in some way innate or the result of
natural sexual selection or something like that.
Yeah, yeah, I do think that I do think,
I think this is a major problem with the
the Santa Barbara. I do think that there's Um,
Uh, I, I, I, I don't know how to
define it, but they, uh, are very keen on
the idea of being tied to, you know, real
science, real biology, and real things, you know, and
they are not willing, at least to my, to
my experience, uh, many of them are not willing
to, um, collaborate. For instance, I think that a
major breakthrough for revolutionary psychology would be, um, you
know, um, more collaborative attitude toward clinical psychology. Because
I do think that being a clinical psychologist myself,
I do think that when you're having therapy, someone
and you help someone, a lot of evolutionary insights
are super helpful for you, super helpful when you,
when you think about sexuality, mating, attachment, status. You
know, you see, you know, young males depressed in
their 30s because they are not attained, uh, in
the status they wanted to attain. And there is
a major difference of, for, for instance, in gender
difference because as, as, as, as David Gerry, which
who you interviewed and know uh knows very well,
you know, there is, you know, males are more
prone to experience depression if uh uh status deprived
than females. And, um, and there is super, they
would be super useful for the clinician other than,
you know, stupid narrative of, oh, let's go and
talk about your parents, uh, which is useful many
of the times because so I am, I am
also, I, I studied a lot of attachment, so
attachment is super important in determining your own health,
mental health. But still, if you are depressed cause
you are, you, you don't have your place in
society, we don't have to talk about your parents.
There is no need to do that. And, um,
and, and so, um, I, I think, I think,
I, I don't know that, um, uh, you know,
there's Gilbert, for instance, the scholar Gilbert, the Australian
guy, or at least, uh, he works in Australia.
And he, he, he, he, he wrote something about
motivations from an evolutionary perspective is, is, is closer
to the clinical, um, the clinical scenario. But still,
if we If we talk about our core evolutionary
sci um Santa Barbara EP scientists, which is a
small but very, um, you know, living, you know,
uh community, uh, they're kind of close because they
have this, you know, um, I think it is
like in politics, you know, we, uh, they have
this, um, they, they, they feel they are hated
by everyone. And the, and the, and end up
being feeling defensive and superior and that don't, don't
help other people to appreciate, appreciate, appreciate them, their
work more. And so um um everything um becomes
um more difficult. But in, in, in theoretically, I
think that evolutionary psychology uh is a beautiful candidate
to be a meta theory. Uh, EVEN more that,
you know, the classical methodological problems, you know, for
instance, with massive modularity are now over, I think,
you know, uh, we, we, um, uh, uh, more
or less, more or less, but I, I don't
think, and, and most of the evolutionary psychologists that
I know, they don't have the strict view of
massive modularity. Maybe to being cosmic, but, but, you
know, For instance, Marco the judicial, who I, I,
I know very well, uh, he always talks about
psychological mechanisms. He never used the word models and,
uh, but I, I do think that some insights
from the modularity, um, hypothesis must to be kept
in order to be specific because the mechanism has
to be specific, to some degree automatic, um, to
some, to some degree independent, and it, it, it
has to be a neural circuitry. Otherwise, I don't
know what we are talking about. Of course, the
problem lies in, to a certain degree. This is
the, the problem, but to a certain degree, of
course. And I, I, I, I don't see how
I, someone can, can believe in a, in a
purely domain general mind, which is a very, very
difficult instance to be. Right,
so, but let me then ask you about another
specific kind of approach within uh psychology. I, I
mean, I'm not, I'm not sure how you look
at it in terms of how it relates to
evolutionary psychology and More specifically evolutionary psychology from Santa
Barbara. But what about cultural, what people call cultural
evolutionary theory or culture or a cultural evolutionary approach?
I mean, is it more, is it more prominent
in the literature than Let's say standard evolutionary psychology
or not.
Not at all. So, uh, starting from my study,
I also, in order to control for the overlapping
between uh EP and SSM I also investigated the
papers which uh which have, uh, you know, uh,
11, at least one of the set of keywords
and at least one of the set of keywords
of the other approach. At least one of the
keywords of the AP, at least one of the
key, and at least one of the keywords of
uh SSM. This way, you can track the so-called
culturally um evolutionary uh laden contributions. And what we
found is that in mainstream psychology, they are fluctuating,
uh, you know, Almost negligibly around 0%, sometimes um
0.03%, but, but don't be, uh, don't be, you
know, um too fast in interpreting this because we
have to remember that especially in the last years.
So the mean of, um, over all the period
I investigated, the mean of, um of uh papers
published per year is um 8, 8,000,000. Last year,
we have 150,000 papers per year on average. So
still, when you're talking less than the 1%, you're
talking on about 500, 600 papers per year. That
means one or two papers published per day, which
isn't that, you know, uh negligible at all. But
if you compare it to the overall amount of
the SSM or the EP this is negligible. Of
course, there is this new research program. The problem
is that as we said before, um, um, So,
for instance, one of the most prominent cultural evolutional
research program is, you know, um uh sprouted out
of the dual linearrison theory by Richardson and, and
Boyd. And uh we have names like uh Macreth
and Eric and this kind of people there. And
the, and I think they are, their background is
mainly. There are biologists, anthropologists, or economists. Very few
psychologists there. Very physical is there and they study
a, no, a broad, um, broad array of, of,
of different things, applying these, um, you know, methods
from evolutionary biology to so uh cultural traits, the
so-called cultural traits. That is a socially learned behaviors,
tradition of socially learned behaviors. Uh, um, THAT is
culture is defined by them as a tradition of,
um, socially learned behaviors and cultural traits are this
kind of, uh, of, uh, of, of quantifiable traits.
And, but the main problem, and I, it is
very um trendy and it is very interesting um
research program. The main problem is that they study
um anthropological issues, sociological issue. Like um they are
on, on a The, the, the, they are more
coarse, you know, the, the, they are not that
fine-grained at the psychological level. They study how is,
uh, I don't know, mm how, uh how many
economic classes are um tied to a specific kind
of religion or um I don't know, uh, how
is it the network of collaboration, but from a
sociological point of level, they don't get to the
individual level of motivation and ultimately, what can help
uh people like me, a clinical psychologist in my
therapy room because they are studying, you know, very
broad uh uh traditional anthropological issues. Yeah. And also
this is, this is informed and some scholars at
the intersection between these two these two research programs
by uh a new approach also in biology, evolutionary
biology that is called the extended evolutionary synthesis or
Ivodivo or and some very important people like Feldman,
Marcus Feldman, who initiated actually the dual in Edison
theory in the 70s with The Ui Cavalli's Forza,
they are still alive and kicking and doing, you
know, their research on, uh, extended evolution into this
with Massimo Pilucci, these kind of guys. And, uh,
but the, that kind of research doing mostly by
biologists, by, you know, by background is focused on
um On biological stuff like insects, like ants, like,
uh, you know, uh, butterflies, uh and, and coral
reef, that kind of, uh, of things which is
very interesting from a theoretical point of view. But,
uh, again, it can say something speculatively about the
human mind. Uh, I know the, the famous Baldi,
uh, Baldwin effect, which is called after a psychology
after all, Baldwin, but um it's very difficult to
see how these predictions by uh like uh uh
um uh uh um uh in the time we
are speaking are somehow useful for the human behavior.
And on the other hand, uh, uh, evolutionary psychology.
Do some study, uh, um, you know, or, or,
or, or say, or say they are sensitive cultural
differences, but they're not actually. They're not, I, I,
I don't think they are. And And, and so
I think this cultural evolutionary research program may may
be interesting in anthropology or sociology or even in
biology, but uh so far, not in psychology. Uh,
IT is not, uh, you know, um, you know,
mature enough to say something in, in, in regards
to how we, uh, behave at the, you know,
more fine-grained level. And I think, I think that
this is tied to a bigger problem that is,
you know, the meaning problem that we spoke about
before. I don't want, I don't know if you
want to get it into now or,
yeah, we can get into it, but let me
just say that, uh, I mean, I, I agree
with you when it comes to where would you
put cultural evolutionary theory and you mentioned anthropology, biology,
but not psychology, and I actually agree with that.
I mean, when I think about cultural evolutionary theorists,
I almost always think of them as being anthropologists.
Yeah,
so.
Or biologists, yeah, or biologists who are trained also
in anthropology, like for instance Rasse Gray and um
who who is a biologist by by background and
then he dedicated himself to, to anthropology. uh YES.
Uh, OK, but, but then, tell us about because
uh before we started recording at a certain point
you mentioned. Uh, ONE issue that you, that you
see both, I, I think that's both within evolutionary
psychology, standard evolutionary psychology and cultural evolutionary theory that
is you said, I think that uh they do
not address issues regarding meaning,
right? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I
think,
OK, so explain that then.
Yeah. So, uh, in social psychology, in the cultural
studies, uh, maybe not in in uh in social
psychology, but in cultural studies, if you go to
a traditional cultural anthropology and ask them what culture
is, they will be uh likely to answer, um,
culture is a web of webs of significance. Which
is a very famous definition by Clifford Gertz, who
is a very famous, you know, anthropologist in the
classical cul cultural anthropological tradition, you know. And, and
on the other hand, if you go to the,
um, you know, cultural evolutionists uh who are anthropologists
or biologists, they are likely to answer. THAT culture
is a tradition of socially learned behaviors where you
can study them behavior also in animals. And so
they are very, very uncompatible in different definitions and
they are, uh, uh, they are an example on
how the natural science and the cul and social
science are still divided and the big divide is
on the concept of meaning and the concept of
meaning is tied to the concept of sense making.
And sense making is the perhaps uniquely human, as
far as we know, capacity to account for reasons
in life, you know. And, and, and, and to,
to find uh a uh uh you know, all
big ideologies and religions, I think they are tied
ultimately to answer questions about life almost trivially. I
don't think they are like the memeticspose it's, you
know, just uh pieces of information that want to
replicate themselves. I think that Christianity, for instance, is
way, it's way more complicated than that. It's like,
it gives a purpose in life to people. I
don't think that purpose is something, um, you know,
illusionary or non-existent. I do think it is very
important. I, I don't know, uh there is this
beautiful example, a friend of mine, Gregory Ricks does
that it is very difficult to Explain, for instance,
you know, I, I don't know if, if you
are familiar with the picture of the Vietnamese monk
who, uh, who, who, you know, who, um, willingly
set himself to fire in order to protest to
the government and it is very difficult to understand
this kind of behavior without taking meaning into account,
you know. And, and it's very, you know, because
probably the guy really believed his gesture was uh
symbolic and necessary and there was a reason he
was pursuing a name he was pursuing. And also
we, we were talking before about the practice of
Japanese people of uh, you know, removing their shoes,
the, their shoes before getting into the, the house.
And you could speculate a lot about the reasons
of this behavior. You could call memetics into question.
We, you could speculate, uh, you know, uh, an
advantage to the um inclusive fitness, but it, I
think that The easiest thing to do is to
tie this behavior to um to the broader problem
in Japanese culture of the division of public and
private self. And so, you are entering a private
space and you must leave your, you know, you,
you must be respectful to that, you know. And
a lot of different behaviors could be easily explained
through this interpretation, which is more qualitative, which is
more uh culturally, you know, more akin to the
cultural studies. But nevertheless, it is very compelling and
I think it is also a clinical psychologist, it
is very compelling when people are facing the absence
of meaning in their life. And if you take
meaning Out of the equation as uh everyone is
doing right now in the cultural, uh, at least
as I know, it is very difficult. Of course,
they are aware of the problem because I, I
do remember the only source in which I found,
you know, a small piece of discussion about it
is a volume edited, uh, you know, published in,
at the end of the 90s, 1997. By Peter
Weingart, which is with a German sociologist, and invited
a lot of important people also for of from
evolutionary psychology. I think Cosmides and to be were
there. One year in Zurich at uh this interdisciplinary
center. To try to, you know, um, help the
natural and the social science get along with each
other. And he mentioned the meaning problem. So that
as, uh, uh, that, that there is no theory
of the emergence of meaning. And I think the
big, big problem here is that there is a
missing point in between our evolutionary history. Of the
and the emergence somehow I, I, I, I do
think with the advent of language of our capacity
to account for meaning. Which is, which is, which
is, uh, which was, I think, a major, major
um transition that um helped that, you know, uh
spurred a lot of religions, mythologies. And uh and
things that, you know. Uh, WE are, are as
humans are deeply affected by.
Uh, AND actually, earlier you mentioned the extended evolutionary
synthesis, and I've already talked about this on the
show with even some of the most prominent names
like Massimoiucci and David Sloan Wilson, uh, and one
of the things that they mentioned, uh, could, and
other people as well that could be included within
the external evolutionary synthesis is symbolism. Right. Oh,
really? I didn't know that.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So symbolism would probably account
for what you're saying there or what you're talking
about there and within anthropology, if we're talking about
the study of humans, uh, it will probably fall
under symbiotics,
right? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So there is also
the, you know, like. Um, LINE of research called
biosemiotics. I don't know, uh, a lot about it,
but yes, but, and, and I, I, I don't
know how the EES scholar want to address this
issue. Maybe you can talk more about it later
because I, I, I, I, I don't know anything
specific, but I do think that one of the
most fascinating thing is that we miss, we miss
an evolutionary link between the emergence of language and
the emergence of meaning. And I do have some,
you know, speculative hypothesis because, so there is this.
A friend of mine, Greg Ricks, who, who has
this um justification hypothesis which is, which is, he
thinks that some time ago, um, about 100 and,
and uh 100,000 years ago, uh, probably our language
uh reached a tipping point in which we uh
transitioned from simple words to um do um sentences,
you know, complex sentences. And he poses that this
kind of, you know, of course, it is a
speculation, but he thinks that this um moment could
have been the starting point of the mythologies and
religions and our capacity of being a person other
than primates, and it's very fascinating. But what I
added to this, you know, justification hypothesis is that
I do think that this is, this was probably
linked to the emergence of causal clauses. So, of
why because uh adverbs, which are, you know, pervasive
when we talk about something, even in the scientific
scenario, uh, you know, cause, causear reasoning is, is
endemic in explaining why. And as Perber and Mercer
said in the book, it is very difficult to
Uh, you know, uh, distinguish in between retrospective and
prospective reas reasons. So it seems that our brain
works as every, every time we want to account
for a reason, we are somehow trying to, uh,
to convince someone and, and, uh, yes, and so
this, you know, this Uh, this, the dynamics in
between convincing others and trying to find a reason
why things are the way they are. Uh, I
think, I think it is a fascinating way to
study, even though it is a very speculative, uh,
I don't know from the operational point of view
how to, how to do that, but it is,
it is, I think this is the missing link,
yes.
So you think then that even cultural evolutionary theory
does not account for things related to meaning and
sense making, is that it?
I don't think so. I, I, I never read
anything, but maybe I'm wrong, maybe it is my
ignorance, I don't know. Uh, I, I would be
very glad to, to know if you or someone
who is watching the show has a different expertise
on this, uh, because really, but I, as far
as I know, no, the meaning is, for instance,
it is very important in clinical psychology, a lot
of, you know, constructivists. Uh, THEORIES, um, has been
built around the concept of meaning. A lot, a
lot, a lot of, of, of, of, of clinical,
um, of clinical works is informed by meaning. For
instance, I, I don't know if you ever read
the, the book by Victor Frank, uh, you know,
the psychiatrist who has been, uh, in, um, in
search for meaning.
Uh, MAYBE, I don't know. I don't know. I,
I don't know Victor Victor Frankl, I think that's
the, the title of the book Man's Search for
Meaning.
You see that kind of thing, you know, when
you, when you are, when you are, um, when
you are, when you experience such, uh, um, you
know, uh, troubling and distressing events such as being
in a concentration camp, the main thing you try
to do later on is to explain it. And
maybe there is an illusion, maybe this is our,
you know, brain just, uh, being, uh, you know,
broken or maybe there is something, you know, bigger,
uh, out of it. I don't know.
Uh, I, I mean, I, I don't know what
you think about this, but I have this idea
that most of what happens in psychotherapies, people, um,
psychotherapists trying to help their patients integrate wherever bad
happens in their lives, wherever. Yeah, whatever bad happens
in the labs into a personal narrative. And when
people are able to integrate that into a personal
narrative, then they make sense of it and that's
when they are able to, I don't know, move
on with their lives and be more positive, I
guess.
Yeah, definitely, yes, yeah, yeah, I think, I think
that I, I don't think. I don't think that,
uh, you know, um, finding, uh, you know, a
reason just cognitively and from a cold perspective is
can help you, uh, most of the times that
cannot help you, but definitely I think that when
you are able to integrate and process all the
information in appropriate way, your narrative becomes more um
cohesive and coherent, yes, yeah, for sure, yeah.
OK, so let me ask you about another thing
because this is also something that you studied when
it comes to evolutionary psychology specifically, what are the
main topics of study there? Because I can, because
one of the things interestingly that I read and
heard from people who are not fans of evolutionary
psychology but come from other Domains other areas like
for example, human beaver ecology or cultural evolutionary theories
that they say that evolutionary psychologists are too focused,
too obsessed with topics like mating, for example.
So
is, is that true or not?
Yeah, so I did this, um, these studies, computational
linguistic studies, uh, thanks to a topic modeling approach.
Or with a thing called uh Latentrichlet allocation. And
what if, and I analyzed the um if I
remember correctly, about 300 or 400 abstracts. The, the
study has still to be published. I, I just
uh Have a, had a presentation to a conference.
But what I found out analyzing the abstracts of
um ethology and sociobiology and then evolution and human
behavior, so the flagship journal Evolutionary Psychology. Yeah. By
the way, it is also a journal, uh, very,
um, very, uh, you know, in, in which many
behavioral ecologists, uh, human behavioral ecologists published, so there
is not the dividing line. Um, BUT nevertheless, and,
uh, and also, uh, like, just a note side,
the other link I, I found in between the
human behavioral eco uh, the, uh, culturally evolutionary program
and the Santa Barbara is that Richardson was the
chair of the evolution and Human Behavior Society, which
is the Santa Barbara thing. So this is somehow
they, sometimes they communicate likely. Getting back to the
topics. Um, YEAH, so, uh, thanks to some, you
know, index, like, um, you know, um, I, I
found, uh, that, um, the, the, the, the, uh,
the core coherence and stability. I found that the
optimal number of topics was 13. And the topic
there is, there is mating there, of course.
M mating and sex differences are that many people
tend to associate with evolutionary psychology.
Definitely yes, but let me take the the the
graph so I can tell you more, uh, specifically
what I'm talking about. Uh, SO, um, at the,
you know, so we have 1313, um, topics, first
of all, and then, of course, I, I, I
can remember it without looking at it. So there
are 13 topics and I can, I can list
it, list them to you. They are vocal communication.
KINSHIP group living, parental investment, male attractiveness, cultural and
cross-cultural studies, female mating, life history theory, social learning,
disgust system, cooperation, perception, and um the kin detection
model in the same, uh, in the same analysis,
sex differences and mating. OK. Of course, what I
want to stress about this um labeling is that
um well, topic modeling is kind to factorize this
so you have after you decided uh on the
optimal uh number of topics, you have have a
list of the most probable words in that topic.
And so by looking at the 1st 10 or
20, you can have an idea on what this
topic is about. But of course, it, it's not
something purely objective. This is important to, to tell
you. And so, these are the 1313 uh um
topics and what I found, I also had, um,
I also did a network analysis, so I, I
plotted them, uh, graphically. And I saw that very
in, of course, mating is super important, but the
central, the most, most central node in the network
is life history theory.
Life history theory. Yeah. And
so I think, I think this is, this is
the, I would say this, this is the most
important uh topic in evolutionary psychology so far. And
for instance, some, some traditional topic like uh parental
investment are colder, so they are decreasing in their
prominence in the abstract of the evolution of human
behavior and previously on theology and sociobiology. On the
other hand, we have, we have, uh, this, you
know, centrality of life history theory. So I, I
would say that it is not at all, all
about mating, but surely, traditionally, um, uh, all the,
you know, most, most of all of the evidence
on evolutionary psychology is exclusively on mating. David Bass
is dedicating himself a lifetime to mating. David Smith,
you know, uh, also. And um um so mating
is, is super important, but I would say that
uh like the contemporary emotional psychology is focusing more
on life history theory.
Right, which is interesting because life history theory is
something that at least I myself, I've already done
more than 1000 interviews, but I would, I, I
would tend to associate it more with uh the
biologists and the behavioral, the behavioral ecologists,
so. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, definitely, yes, but the,
the, the cool thing with life history theory. Is
that, you know, they, they have all these nice
models, uh, mathematical models. It is highly formal as
a theory. And uh there is also, you know,
the theory by, by Marco de Juice about evolutionary
psychology is all centered about life history theory. And
I think it is very, also very This is
another thing that clinicians would benefit a lot from
evolutionaries like you, like the fact that the condition
in which you are raised, the environmental variables, so
the harshness and the uh um um uh unpredictability
of your environment really set your biological parameters to
a certain, you know, functioning. And so you are
more prone to go to the faster end of
the continuum or or to the slow end of
the continuum, and that is Fascinating because if you
have, you know, this traditional approach of uh everything
that happens in your first years of life, bad
is going to ruin you exclusively. On the other
hand, if you, in a sort of humanistic psychology
um uh way, see also, you know, the, the
good part of the um of the, the other
side of the coin, the, the good part, uh,
you can see that many, uh, you know, uh
fascinating adaptations. ARE arising from harsh and unpredictable environment.
For instance, all the, um, all the uh adaptation
in the creative uh schizotypic spectrum and uh also
some adaptation in the narcissistic spectrum, of course, not
the more of, not the most disturbing ones. But
you see, again, we are kind of mixing the
moral level with the descriptive level. Uh, BECAUSE if
you see like most of the top-notch, uh, mm,
you know, uh, people, uh, you know, successful people,
uh, in the, in the, um, even in academia
surely have some dark tri traits. Surely they have
and uh there have been studies about it. And
so, of course, you can see it morally and
that it's bad, but you can see it descriptively
and that it is true. And there are 22
different things.
Right. So, let me just ask you because I
was reading here from your paper that you say,
as you said there, the, the two most prevalent
specific topics are mating, general and uh life. History
theory, but then you also mentioned that the two
hottest topics are cooperation and male attractiveness, and the
two coldest topics are mating general and parental investment
theory. So explain that what,
yeah, yeah, so I have, I have a topic
right here. So yes, so speaking of mating, I
think that that is um and it is the
first in the, in, in the code, uh, in
the code list. So it is the topic that
is has decreased with the um fitting regression line
like more, uh more sharply. OK. And so because
meeting was very important for David Bass and his
collaborators to lay down the very foundation of uh
evolutionary psychology, but I think that. I don't know
if everything that could have been written on mating
has been written, but most of it. So it
is like less, less fascinating for, for people. And
speaking of the cold topics, the other cold topics
are parental investment and the same thing, which is,
you know, mating and parental investment are kind of
intervened because, you know, uh, Trevor's theory about parental
investment informed David Bass on, on mating. And uh
speaking of the hot topic, so I would say
that speaking of the first one, which is cooperation,
I would say that this is the reason, this
is informed that the cultural evolutional program because cooperation
is traditionally studied, you know, um, through, game theory,
for instance. And so highly mathematical model, uh, more
prone to kind of uh um anthropological lens. Uh,
BECAUSE, you know, cooperation has been studied traditionally by
anthropologists rather than psychologists, you know, and I think
this reflects what we are talking, what we were
talking about before. So the fact that cultural evolution
is a super trendy research program and so you
see it also in uh in uh evolution and
human behavior. Yeah. And speaking of the, on the
other, um, hot topics. Uh, ALSO that this uh
so we like if we, if we go on
the ranking, we have cooperation and then we have,
uh, uh, male attractiveness, which is the second, which
nevertheless tied to mating. I don't know if I
have something to say about it. And then we
have cultural and cross-cultural which is again tied to
the cultural evolution uh research program, I would say.
And then we have the disgust system, which is
very interesting because the discuss system in the network
analysis, uh, it isn't, um, so a network analysis
uh for, for those who doesn't know it is,
uh, basically a way to see partial correlations. So
the uniquely, uh, the, the correlation between variables controlling,
uh, for the, for the, for the correlation. With
the other variables. So this X and it's uh
Y, um, the, the magnitude of this relationship is
controlled by the others, you know, potentially confounding variables
like Z in between them. And so you can
see how things are related to each other and
that this gas system is uh far away from
the, from the rest of the, of the, of
the, of the graph. And the interesting thing is
that It, it is like attachment, a motivational system.
But it is very, uh, it has been, uh,
you know, studied very specifically from the immunological perspective.
And so it is very not tied to the
other rest of the evolutionary reasoning, but it is
a kind of, you know, I, I've been to,
to a conference and that, there were a lot
of um contribution about disgust. So the tend to
avoid the potential pathogens in the, in the environment.
And then we to, to, and we have uh
vocal communication, which is the 5th, but I, I
don't know if I, if I have something to
say about vocal communication. Uh, I think vocal communication
is, um, you know, it has been uh considered
as a separate topic, uh, because of the technicalities
of the LDA approach and, uh, but it could
be easily, um, I think merged on one end
to mating because uh studying, uh, you know, study
the um. The tone of males, uh, how it
is perceived as attractive or or not attractive by
women, or I think the other thing, uh, the
other way it could be studied is maybe in
status competition, but yes, I think this is, uh,
this is, uh, what this this topic is about.
Mhm. So, um, just before we wrap up our
conversation, let me ask you a broad question. So,
when it comes to evolutionary psychology, possibly being a
scientific revolution, you said no. But then, I mean,
how do you look at the Perhaps the future
of psychology, taking into account all of the issues
that we pointed to there, including the fact that
there's several different sub-disciplines tend to be insular and
not, there's not many cross fertilization, there's not lots
of cross fertilization uh across the different uh psychological
sub-disciplines. So how do you look at it? Do
you think that There's any chance of in the
somewhat near future having something that could become or
that could turn psychology into a paradigmatic discipline.
I don't think so. I don't think so. Uh
LUCKILY, I wish, I wish I would, uh, I
wish I was more hopeful and optimistic, but I'm
not, I'm not. I, if I, if I, if
I have, have to be honest, I see that
the, I don't know in the years to come,
but as for now, I, I think, I, I,
and I see this is a, uh, uh ill
uh malady. And, uh, a, a problem, you know,
the, the prominence of the standard social science model
approach is getting bigger and bigger and getting ideological
and ideological. And this is, uh, this is scary
for me. And this is scary for me because
I have many emails, you know, asking for editors
and collaborators in leading journals in the field and
I perceived the, them a kind of racist because
they just want, you know, people from, from mar.
OR you know, by, by, I, I, I do
call it um by um communities and uh I
don't like this kind of uh you know, trend
which is endemic in the US aca academia. So
speaking of the, you know, um, brief or medium
term, I see this is a problem. Um, I
don't know if this is the main problem of
psychology, but this is one of, one problem. I,
I, I, I, I see that it's getting more
and more ideological, and I think this is a
huge problem, a huge problem. Uh, AS a side.
Um, As another big problem is tied to another
bigger problem, not tied exclusively to psychology, but is
that of hyperproductivity. And I think that uh most
of scientific, so for instance, in the study that
I've done on psychinfo, we found that Each day
on cycling for. So, the medium, on average each
day in scientific psychology, if you call scientific psychology
each paper indexed in like info, we have 437.5
papers published. That means approximately 1 paper every 3
minutes. Mm Yeah, that's,
that's a bit ridiculous.
That's a bit, that's totally ridiculous, you know, you
think, of course, of course, you know, as science
grows, you cannot be, um, you, you, you can
be specialized in your own niche, of course, you
can, you know, you, there is no Leonardo da
Vinci anymore in our society, and that's OK, but
But this kind of hyper productivity, which is not,
you know, an exclusive of psychology, is endemic in
medicine, biology, engineering, and whatever. Um, IT'S, it's pushing
the scientific standards down. And I see also in,
in my personal academic, uh, you know, life, uh,
and I, I think I, I'm, I'm, I'm about
to finish my PhD and then I think I
will have some time, uh, you know, away from
academia, maybe in the future, I will be back
at it, but for now, I have to spend
some, some time away. I, I see that, you
know, scientific transparency and quality are Super rare and
most of the time is uh is um is
uh is like who you know, uh who you
are submitting your paper with and, and So that
is another, and, and most of the, and, and
I'm, I'm not afraid to say, to say, most
of the professors, even a full professor I know,
they're not good scientists. Most of them, most of
them. Like I, I, I can count on my
hand, you know, the, you know, the, the good
scientists I know. Like, at least not, not speaking
of, um, not speaking of, uh, you know, pure
intellectual ability, which is one thing and it's truly
important, but about, you know, ethical transparency and, uh,
you know, um the willingness of, uh, doing a
research just to do the research, just to answer
the fucking question, you know. And I think, I
think that's, that's kind of uh disturbing. And so,
uh, this is one other bigger problem, not tied
to psychology, which is also kind of, you know,
people don't have time to read. Papers. People and
most, most importantly, people do not have to think.
And, and they think that, you know, theoretical question
because one of the problems of evolutionary psychology is
that it is heavy theoretically laden, and I love
it for that because it has a lot of
theory behind it. And it is very rare in
psychology. If you go to social psychology, it's all,
you know, sla equation models, uh factor loadings. Now
we have a theory. This, this kind of attitude,
you know. And, uh, on the other hand, the,
the thing I love of evolutionary psychology and they
spend time in thinking, OK, what is the most
um uh most reasonable theory to endorse, to have
a decent theory of the human mind. We have
this proposal, maybe we are wrong in some regards,
but we have this proposal, and I think this
is still the most solid and robust proposal because
it, it, it ties psychology to, to biology, which
is a necessity in my opinion. And um Still,
a lot of people do not have the time
to think or do not have interesting uh interest
in theoretical issues. And so there are, you know,
this um super empiricism which is, which is a
catastrophe in, in psychology. And so this is the
3rd reason. So, first reason, uh, we have, uh,
we have, you know, the SSM, uh, the ideology,
then we have high productivity, then we have the
unwillingness of scholars to think and to read. And
so I don't think, I don't see it as
a possible uh for revolutionary psychology or other theories
to become paradigms. I, I see the possibility, to
be honest, of the SSM as for now, the
standard social on the other end, it seemed that
it is right now the most, the closest thing
to a paradigm in psychology that, that I ever
seen in my life because people are scared of
being against it. And, and so, you know, they,
they, they don't, don't want to do anything against
it. And I don't know, maybe this is not
going to last, hopefully, but, uh, actually, this is
uh quite endemic among people. uh, FOR instance, a
lot of people in neuroscience are, are, are, uh,
are, uh, more than happy to join SSM instances.
Uh, SO people biologists, biology-oriented people, and And so,
yes, my, my, I, I, I, I, I'm not,
I, I'm not that hopeful uh for the future
and I don't know, I don't know if we,
we, maybe the only thing we would be ever
able is that when you, when we have that
um knowledge of genetics that will help us, you
know, in tracing, you know, the power of uh
of genetics in determining our disposition dispositions, that could
be one thing. But you, you see, this is
very problematic relationship with ethics. And with uh the,
the temptation to conflate is versus out and uh
human to human, as Nietzsche used to say, tendency
of not being transparent and uh and honest in
life. And yeah, as for now, I'm not optimistic.
Well, it is, uh, I, I mean, I'm also
not very optimistic, particularly even more so because of
the, the lack of cross fertilization and the fact
that people do not have enough time to familiarize
them. Themselves with other specialized areas. So, yeah, it,
it's very complicated. I, I don't blame anyone. I,
I don't blame people in general because it's also
very hard to have enough time to do that,
so. And perhaps, and perhaps just having more time
to think would be good because if you go
and go back and look into the biographies of
some of the greatest geniuses in history, they all
have tons of time to think, so.
You know, uh, I think Darwin, it took Darwin
something like 20 or 30 years to write the
Origin of Species, which is, which is unthinkable in
these times, unthinkable, unthinkable. You, you, you do not
even have 20 days, so it's kind of, it's
kind of, you know, you, you, you, you don't
have the time to think and um. Yes, I
think this is the major, major problem.
Yes. Yeah. OK, so where can people find you
when you work on the internet?
OK, so, um, good question. So uh you can
contact me in my email. Uh, I can, I
can, which is, uh, I can, I don't know
if you can like um
Uh, like, uh, put it on the description, yeah,
the
description of my personal email. Then I'm building my
personal site which will be online, I think in
2 or 3 weeks. I don't know when will
this be released, but uh uh I have a
personal site. I have also an Instagram account, which
is more like in Italian, so I, because I
kind of do like uh I, I, I love
to do kind of popular science. Uh, VIDEO to,
you know, to communicate sciences. I also I have
a TikTok account, but it's in Italian, so I
don't know if the people of the watching this
video are interested in it, but I can share
you with you all the details and you can
find them in the description. And if you have
some questions, please do not hesitate in contacting me.
Uh, IN my personal email for sure, yes.
Great. So look, I really love this conversation. I
was very much looking forward to it and I
think it was very productive and informative. So thank
you so much for doing this. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you too. Uh, SEE you
guys.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearraujurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff
McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.